move on to the middle east now because
president biden has said he backs
a ceasefire in gaza and said the u.s is
engaging with egypt and other partners
to secure one
in a phone call with the israeli prime
minister benjamin netanyahu
mr biden also voiced his support for
israel's right to defend itself against
indiscriminate rocket attacks
while urging mr netanyahu to protect
civilians
more than 212 people including 61
children have died in gaza
and 10 including two children in israel
this was the scene in gaza city as day
broke
bringing with it more airstrikes with
the latest here's our middle east editor
jeremy bowen
nightmares come true in gaza for parents
and their children
this mother couldn't talk about the
airstrike that engulfed them last friday
eight-year-old mustafa al-zahana and his
mother are further down the children's
ward at
chifa gaza's main hospital she says
mustafa trembles when he hears israeli
attacks
ever since the one that wounded him
almost a week ago
as he left their home with his father to
buy new clothes
for the end of ramadan his father was
paralyzed
most of his friend who went with them is
dead
his friend was killed when bara was
dying
he was clutching my son tightly and
telling him not to leave him alone
but died when my son has a fever he
hallucinates about it
as well as the badly injured 61 children
in gaza have been killed
in the last week
about 20 miles north is this synagogue
in the israeli town of
ashkelon it was hit by a hamas rocket
it was the festival of shavuot the feast
of weeks
usually a celebration it's a very sad
time for
for us over here in ashkelon we are
always on
bombing i hope it will finish
fast in jerusalem the western wall plaza
was almost deserted
this is the holiest place for jews to
pray it's usually packed on religious
holidays but some of the worshippers
said people were scared to go out
the grey dome of al-aqsa mosque is one
of the most sacred places for muslims
you can see how close it is to the wall
above the wall is the golden dome of the
rock both muslim shrines are built on
the site of the ancient jewish temple
these sites are all also national
symbols a month of tension here
raised the hatred level so high it led
to war
the events of the last week have shown a
couple of things first of all
the power of jerusalem to ignite this
conflict
and hamas have sent a strong message
to palestinians that as far as they're
concerned
they are their real protectors here in
the holy city
even though hamas hq is 60 or 70 miles
away
by the sea in gaza our gaza producer
filmed his drive to work and you can see
the bomb sites
if palestinians and israelis could be
equally safe
and secure they might have a chance of
peace
right now they don't jeremy bowen bbc
news
jerusalem well let's speak now to the
former prime minister of sweden carl
biltz he currently sits as co-chair on
the european council on foreign
relations a pan
european think tank mr bill thank you
very much for joining us
on bbc news the united states blocking a
u.n
security council statement again calling
for a
cessation of violence in the region
although president biden
has spoken of his support for a
ceasefire will
eu foreign ministers meeting today
explicitly call
for an end to the violence
well i certainly hope so um particularly
now with even president biden had come
out and talked about a ceasefire and
i would expect that within not too
distant future we will have a ceasefire
i think the important thing is what
happened thereafter
that uh international community be that
the united states would be that
the european union doesn't just walk
away from the issue again
as we've done after these outbursts of
jerusalem or gaza that
occurs frequently a comprehensive
solution might be difficult that's
granted but it should be possible to
move towards a more stable situation
after this but it requires
political determination and political
courage and i hope that
you can demonstrate that so why
specifically
do you think do you say that a ceasefire
may be coming i mean what's happening on
the ground what's happening
internationally to make you say that
uh i do apologize we're having problems
uh with the lines to guests
let me see if we can get carl built back
uh while we do that this is the
area around sterot in in southern israel
very close to the border with gaza
where we have seen sustained activity
from the israeli army
obviously this is an area that is within
range
of rockets fired by hamas militants
and we're now into the second week of
this
violence in the region as efforts
continue
to find a diplomatic solution and to in
the first
instance secure a cessation
of violence i i believe we do have carl
biltback
co-chair of the european council on
foreign relations apologies for the
technical issues
mr bilt i was just asking you
why you had said to me that you think
that a ceasefire
may be coming soon because that is what
normally happens i mean
these these conflicts over gaza that
they don't go on forever
at some point in time israel will say
that we've run out of a target list and
we will accept
a ceasefire and i hope hamas does the
same
but the important thing is what happens
thereafter that we just don't walk away
from the issue because the only thing
that is certain if that happens is that
the conflict is going to be back new
rockets new airstrikes new misery
and how do we build how do we build a
sustained
conversation a sustained dialogue and
diplomatic
effort to ensure that we don't have
these crisis points
and then more conversation how do you
keep the conversation going then to try
to work towards a longer-term solution
difficult difficult difficulty but the
first thing you have to do is to try to
do it
i mean in the last few years the
international community be that the
americans are the europeans have not
been very active on these issues
it is difficult it is hard it might fail
but if you don't try
it will not happen and and there are i
remember way back
10 15 years ago when we have this
outburst as well
then the eu was trying actively to
facilitate some sort of at least
temporary solution
so there are models that can be used in
order to
get a slightly better situation you say
that the core problem is the absence of
a two-state solution
um where where do you think
international efforts are
on that question nowhere
uh i mean the americans i mean the trump
administration was against the two-state
solution defector
divided administration seems to i can
understand that they seem to be
reluctant to engage because it's too
difficult
the europeans have been too divided
lately to be a particular active actress
netanyahu is against so it's difficult
so perhaps one should start with trying
to sort out them
issue by issue see can we do something
with garcia can we do something with the
issues in jerusalem can we do something
with something else
but just to walk away from the issue is
i think that's been demonstrated not
responsible
let me pick up on what you said uh about
joe biden
you don't think that the u.s is going to
engage in this you say because
they see it as simply too difficult
the obama administration in the second
term john kerry was the envoy
did make a very determined attempt to
move forward with the two state
solutions
and and failed no faults of that but
failed
of course part of that administration uh
bruised by that experience you think
i think washington is bruce by that
particular experience um
then of course trump tried to do
something entirely different that's of
the cards at the moment but i i would
hope that in spite of that experience
and in spite of perhaps understanding
that sort of a two-state solution within
the next few months is not
achievable to put it badly there that's
issues that needs to be dealt with
say garcia is an example of what can be
dealt with and must be there
it feels like the international
community needs to take this in small
steps because trying to clearly solve
the totality of this is impossible at
the moment so as you say it is about
small stages so what do you think
needs to be the next step
well the immediate step is obviously a
ceasefire
then perhaps i think one should start
perhaps with the gauss asia perhaps with
the jerusalem issue perhaps with some
issue
and then move gradually forward with
those particular issues i mean certainly
not giving up on a two-state solution
but perhaps doing more incrementally
instead of the big bang
okay carl built a former swedish prime
minister now co-chair of the european
council on foreign relations thank you
very much